# FT232H as a programmer/debugger for Xilinx

Vivado supports programmers based on the FT232H chip by flashing their EEPROM
with some Xilinx specific IDs.

I used an [Adafruit FT232H Breakout](https://www.adafruit.com/product/2264)
which I anyway had laying around.

I stumbeled into some problems using the `program_ftdi` utility provided
by Xilinx, namely not being able to reliably flash the original EEPROM
that came with the Adafruit FT232H Breakout board. Instead, `ftdi_eeprom`
can be used to read the original EEPROM contents before flashing.

## Reading the original EEPROM contents

`ftdi_eeprom` needs to be configured using a configuration file that
tells the tool which part to use and where to store the EEPROM contents:

```config
# file: ftdi.conf
vendor_id=0x0403
product_id=0x6014

flash_raw=true
filename=ftdi_eeprom_adafruit.bin
```

Finally, read the contents of the EEPROM using
```shell
sudo ftdi_eeprom --read-eeprom --verbose ftdi.conf
```

## Flashing the new Xilinx configuration

To configure the FTDI chip such that it is recognized as a programmer/debugger
in Vivado, the `program_ftdi` tool (part of Vivado) can be used:

```shell
sudo program_ftdi -write -s 00000000 -ftdi FT232H
```

`-s 00000000` sets the serial number.

## Revert to the original EEPROM contents

Use the same configuration file as in the [previous step](#reading-the-original-eeprom-contents):
```shell
sudo ftdi_eeprom --flash-eeprom ftdi.conf
```

## Troubleshooting

`sudo` might be required depending on your `udev` rules.

Make sure only one FTDI device is connected. Otherwise, you might get
an error "key "0" not known in dictionary".
This was the case if I left the Red Pitaya connected which also has an
FTDI chip.

Depending on your operating system, you might need to disable kernel
modules that access the FTDI chip such that it becomes available to
`libftdi` (which itself uses `libusb`). On Arch Linux, I had to disable
`ftdi_sio`:
```shell
sudo rmmod ftdi_sio
```

As you might need `ftdi_sio` for other peripherals, such as the serial console
of the Red Pitaya, you can disable the kernel module just for the FTDI device
using a `udev` rule:
```udev
# /etc/udev/rules.d/99-ftdi-disable.rules
ACTION=="add", SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6014", RUN+="/bin/sh -c 'echo -n 0403:6014 > /sys/bus/usb/drivers/ftdi_sio/unbind'"

```

# Pinout

| FTDI Breakout board | JTAG  |
| ------------------- | ----- |
| `ADBUS0` (`D0`)     | `TCK` |
| `ADBUS1` (`D1`)     | `TDI` |
| `ADBUS2` (`D2`)     | `TDO` |
| `ADBUS3` (`D3`)     | `TMS` |
| `GND`               | `GND` |

> [!WARNING]
> On the Red Pitaya, the 3.3V pin should not be connected. Power the
> board normally using the 5V USB connector.

If Vivado detects the FTDI programmer/debugger but not the FPGA, you might
have to swap `TDI` and `TDO` (depends on the convention).
